planning checklist blog (#61)
ankeetmaini/blog: content/posts/planning-checklist.md

---
title: planning checklist for people in tech
description: this post tries to add a method to madness which runs amok every 3 months and both leaders and teams run helter-skelter to put an exciting list of okrs together to executing them
layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2024-05-13
tags:
  - leadership
  - planning
---

it's almost may and in just about a month a brand new quarter would start which comes with a possibility of endless opportunities in engg roadmap parlance. 

> we've come a long way from knowing what would get done years in advance, like a construction building, say a new mall for which once the blueprint is finalised, you can usually estimate the multi-year work upfront at least on paper before you dive deep into execution. but who knew building software is even tougher or have we deliberately made it that way?

Author: +1, although i was thinking that the fuzziness of it makes it even more complex. you set out to build one thing but then something else gets built as the ideas evolve

we work in sprints, we put our heads down for two weeks and then again and again. some teams decide within these two weeks what next to do and sort of groom their stories with no hints or indication of what lies ahead and coins words like agile :P

but there's just too much flux in this way. there's so much extra time being spent deciding every two weeks what to do. does it even matter right now or can be pushed out?

> in real world, work happens around big projects and launches. and they have dates or an expected date of launch. everything begins from there and you usually back calculate.

Author: reworded it to companies.

so with above context, how do you decide what gets done in a quarter? what actually is **planning**?

> you can wing it yolo style because life's too short to plan anything, because seriously who cares?

> **actually you should, as if your life depends on it**

Author: ok, i see. i’m saying you should plan meticulously.

> **actually you should, as if your life depends on it**

Author: see if it reads better?

i've done it both ways (just don't tell my boss though), planned (roadmaps, sprints) on the fly and derived them meticulously by using the below framework. the difference was monumental in the quality of deliverables and the morale of the team!

> earlier i'd have a meeting every two weeks, rethinking priorities and not just me, my entire team. i thought having them on the call would give them visibility but all they saw was uncertainty and jitteriness. they felt as if nobody had any idea what exactly needed to be done, and everyone was busy pitching things they would like to do instead which might not be in the best interest of the organisation. like everyone can't work on reducing build times or trying out a new framework which came out yesterday!

Reviewer: optional: the nobody and everyone confused me, maybe more words for some clarity 

```suggestion
earlier i'd have a meeting every two weeks, rethinking priorities and not just me, my entire team. i thought having them on the call would give them visibility but all they saw was uncertainty and jitteriness. they felt as if nobody had any idea what exactly needed to be done, and the entire team was busy pitching things they would like to do instead which might not be in the best interest of the organisation. doesn’t make sense for everyone to work on reducing build times or trying out a new framework which came out yesterday!
```

> so i had to change, and below is what i put together after i got humiliated at a party with my peers and bosses :P (no surprises there)

Reviewer: optional: gossip! share more details?

Author: i actually started bragging how i do sprint plannings and then everyone was like; dude that’s the worst way to do it. lol

## 1. draft objectives & key results
<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
    <td>who</td>
    <td>ems and pms should deliberate and debate on the most important problems and get leadership buy-in.<br><br>some orgs have yearly okrs published by the ceo/cto's office which can be translated into okrs at your level which is nothing but matching your efforts to meet the company goals</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>when</td>
    <td>40 days before quarter starts (q - 40 days)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>output</td>
    <td>objectives &amp; key results with impact</td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<div class="message-box">

e.g. 
- objective: improve the conversion funnel by 20% on our e-commerce app
- key results:
  - reduce page load of product page from 6s → 3.5s

>   - remove friction on payment page by showing up upi as the top payment mode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - remove friction on payment page by showing UPI as the top payment mode
```

we work in sprints, we put our heads down for two weeks and then again and again. some teams decide within these two weeks what next to do and sort of groom their stories with no hints or indication of what lies ahead and coin words like agile :P

but there's just too much flux in this way. there's so much extra time being spent deciding every two weeks what to do. does it even matter right now or can be pushed out?

in companies, work usually happens around big projects and launches. and they have dates or an expected date of launch. everything begins from there and you usually back calculate.

so with above context, how do you decide what gets done in a quarter? what actually is **planning**?

> you can choose to wing it yolo style because life's too short to plan anything, because seriously who cares?

**but you should care, as if your life depends on it**

i've done it both ways (just don't tell my boss though), planned (roadmaps, sprints) on the fly and derived them meticulously by using the below framework. the difference was monumental in the quality of deliverables and the morale of the team!

> earlier i'd have a meeting every two weeks, rethinking priorities and not just me, my entire team. i thought having them on the call would give them visibility but all they saw was uncertainty and jitteriness. they felt as if nobody had any idea what exactly needed to be done, and the entire team was busy pitching things they would like to do instead which might not be in the best interest of the organisation. it doesn’t make sense for everyone to work on reducing build times or trying out a new framework which came out yesterday!

Author: so on point!

  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>when</td>
    <td>a month before the quarter starts (q - 30 days)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>output</td>
    <td>breakdown and scope definition of activities/tasks with t-shirt size (broad) estimates</td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<div class="message-box">

e.g.
- key result: reduce page load of product page from 6s → 3.5s
- initiatives
  - reduce the javascript bundle size by 120kb to improve time to interactive
    - remove lodash
    - write a lighter implementation for the product page image component which is 100kb in size
  - 🔺 enable edge caching for product listing call to speed up the api response time
  - 🔺 partial painting of product page reusing the state of homepage while the api call is in progress

> 🔺 means that the initiative needs refinement and is a fuzzy item. it will usually require an hld/lld/1-pager and would probably get executed as a spike item where concrete details would get added after a deep-dive or a small poc.

> >> the staff+ engineers would also have to make a case as to why do they think the above initiative is needed with roi in mind as well, because such fuzzy initiatives require greater engineering efforts and often run into risk during execution

Author: _on the off chance, if all of your items are fuzzy, then it means that the planning is broken and the team is just putting all eggs into a singe basket, basket of uncertainty. in that case, adjust your goals to collect more data/insights first before jumping to solve the problem_

how does this look?
